

    A Practical Handbook of Urdu Meter, by F. W. Pritchett and
      Kh. A. Khaliq

      @import "../stylesheets/comm2.css";

            Cover

                    of the 1987 printed version, designed by FWP, based
                    on the cover of the :tilismaat-e ((ajaa))ib,
                    an old book of magic and wonders from the Naval
                    Kishor Press.

                ~~
                      INTRODUCTION 
                   TO
                        THE NEW ONLINE VERSION ~~ 

                We said at the
                    end of Chapter 8 in the original print edition
                    (1987) that real ahl-e zabaan were
                    made and not born. That may have been only partially
                    the case then, but it's all too true by now.
                    Traditionally-educated ustads are a dying breed.
                    Classical Urdu poetry, like so much else, belongs
                    less and less to those who simply inherit it, and
                    more and more to those who seek it out and adopt it
                    for their own. 

                The very forces
                    that have deprived us of traditionally-educated
                    ustads, however, have brought us the internet. Now
                    Urdu poetry is international, and we can share with
                    each other across time and space. And of course we
                    still have Mir and Ghalib, and so much else besides.
                    So dig in, you ahl-e zabaan of the
                    future, and learn to use the tools. Classical ghazal
                    poetry is an astonishing delight. The rewards are so
                    rich that you won't exhaust them in a lifetime.

                Fran Pritchett 
                    New York, July 2003 

              ***Table of
                          Contents***

              INTRODUCTION 
                to
                      the original print edition (South Asian Studies,
                      University of Wisconsin at Madison, 1987)

                This handbook is designed to be of use to
                  English-speaking students of Urdu poetry. Above all it
                  will be helpful to those students for whom English is
                  a native language. One of the authors is such a
                  student, while the other has been teaching such
                  students for years. We have written the kind of book
                  we can best use ourselves, for our own work; other
                  students and teachers have also found our approach
                  helpful. Our method does not assume a native speaker's
                  instinct, an intuitive perception, or an "ear" for
                  poetry. Even a completely tone-deaf and unintuitive
                  student can learn to scan Urdu poetry with great
                  accuracy. And a student who does have an "ear" can
                  also learn to hear, recite, and enjoy the oral rhythms
                  of the poetry as immediately as any native speaker. A
                  determined student can even compose metrically correct
                  verse himself; a number of Westerners have done
                  so.  
                We do, however, assume the student's ability to
                  understand the words of a poem in their normal prose
                  sense, and to pronounce them carefully and correctly.
                  This does not mean that only advanced students should
                  study poetry. On the contrary: we feel strongly that
                  even beginning students can enjoy poetry, and can
                  profit by exposure to it. But the poetry chosen for
                  study should be suited to the student's background.
                  The student who cannot recognize and pronounce most of
                  the words of a poem, and cannot generally understand
                  their grammar, cannot properly scan that poem. No
                  method can enable him to do so, and certainly not
                  ours. Such a student needs a good dictionary, a good
                  teacher, or an easier poem; he must generally
                  understand the poem's words in order to correctly
                  evaluate its meter.  
                Another sort of student who can profitably use our
                  method is the native speaker of Urdu (or the
                  Hindi-speaker who has learned Urdu script) who has a
                  serious interest in recitation or composition, but
                  finds traditional Urdu poetics intimidating. Virtually
                  all existing accounts of Urdu meter start with the
                  elaborate metrical systems of Arabic and Persian
                  poetic theory. These systems are complex enough in
                  themselves, and must be further modified to suit a
                  language for which they were not originally intended.
                  Our method differs from traditional accounts in being
                  completely descriptive and practical; it is designed
                  to meet the immediate needs of the student, rather
                  than to explicate the orthodox system or to develop
                  any other comprehensive theory. Our method starts with
                  the poetry as actually encountered, and explains its
                  scansion in what we think is the simplest and most
                  efficient way. The native speaker who prefers poetry
                  to poetic theory will find our handbook convenient. 
                Finally, we hope that our work will be of interest to
                  those fully conversant with traditional Urdu poetic
                  theory. It may offer a few new perspectives, and
                  suggest different ways of looking at familiar
                  phenomena.  
                The first draft of this handbook was compiled during
                  the course of the Berkeley Urdu Language Program in
                  Pakistan, 1979-1980, and our earliest debts are to
                  people associated with that program. The Program owes
                  its long and healthy career to Professor Bruce Pray of
                  the University of California at Berkeley, who has been
                  a friend and counsellor to us both. Dr. Ruth Laila
                  Schmidt, Field Director for 1979-1980, arranged for us
                  to have the time and freedom for this project. One of
                  the Program's teachers, Arif Vaqar, and one of its
                  participants, Mark S. Pegors, took an especially
                  strong interest in the project, and their continuing
                  suggestions and criticisms were most helpful. All
                  those involved in the Program encouraged us, and
                  gallantly endured the hours of heated discussion which
                  we inflicted upon them. In particular we thank Altaf
                  Fatima, who has been a very good friend to us both,
                  for her counsel, encouragement, and many cups of
                  tea.  
                After the first draft of the book was prepared in
                  Lahore during 1979-1980, circumstances made it
                  impossible for the authors to work together in
                  completing it: Frances Pritchett had to return to the
                  United States, while Khaliq Ahmad Khaliq remained in
                  Lahore. The later drafts, including the final one,
                  were therefore prepared by F. Pritchett after her
                  return to the United States. Although Khaliq Sahib has
                  had a chance to see them in a general way, the final
                  responsibility for the shape of the book, and for any
                  errors it may contain, must be borne by F. Pritchett.
                  She thanks all her Urdu students at Columbia
                  University who have made use of the successive drafts
                  of this book and contributed their suggestions;
                  Randolph Thornton in particular has taken a serious
                  interest in the project.  
                Above all, the handbook owes incomparably much to the
                  close scrutiny given it by Shamsur Rahman Faruqi, who
                  is, among many other distinctions, perhaps the best
                  modern authority on Urdu meter. Faruqi Sahib was kind
                  enough to prepare extensive notes which became the
                  basis for our discussion of feet and meters, and to
                  suggest appropriate entries for the Bibliography. He
                  also gave us the benefit of his advice and criticism
                  throughout. The chance to draw on his specialized
                  knowledge in this field was invaluable, and we are
                  most grateful.  
                We also thank Professor Gopi Chand Narang, of Delhi
                  University; Professor M. A. R. Barker, of the
                  University of Minnesota at Minneapolis; and Professor
                  Ralph Russell, formerly of the School or Oriental and
                  African Studies of the University of London, for their
                  most valuable comments and suggestions. Professors
                  Muhammad Umar Memon and Narayana Rao of the University
                  of Wisconsin at Madison have also given encouragement
                  and help to the project. The elegant and beautiful
                  Urdu script which appears in this volume is generated
                  by a program called "Khushnavis," designed by
                  Professor Donald Becker of the University of Wisconsin
                  at Madison. Professor Becker was most generous with
                  his help in preparing the manuscript and designing its
                  printed format, and the book owes him the ultimate
                  debt: it could not have existed in its present form
                  without his work.  
                Frances W. Pritchett 
                    New York, 1987   
                Khaliq Ahmad Khaliq 
                    Lahore, 1980   

             --

                  meter book index -- Ghalib sitemap -- Mir sitemap
                  -- FWP's
                    main page -- 

