

   07_scanning

      @import "../stylesheets/comm2.css";

          SEVEN == SCANNING 
            AS CODE-BREAKING

          Using the material in this book, 
            you can determine the meter of almost any Urdu poem with complete 
            accuracy. The only condition is that you must have enough lines to 
            work with. Eight lines are usually more than sufficient. Two lines 
            are sometimes not enough. 
          When you are new to the process, 
            it's important to work calmly and carefully and pay full attention. 
            The normal process of scanning is so reassuringly mechanical that 
            mistakes and anomalies can seem quite disconcerting. And as we will 
            see, some uncertainties are inevitable on the first reading. But the 
            encouraging truth is that after all, all traditional and most modern 
            poetry CAN most definitely be scanned. Urdu meter is a far more powerful 
            and reliable tool for the student than English meter. 
          Start with the first word in the 
            first line, and divide it into syllables according to the three basic 
            criteria (Sections 1.2, 1.3, 
            and 1.4). Work from orthography 
            first; very often it is sufficient in itself. If it is not, pronounce 
            the word mentally for guidance. Consider whether there are any flexible 
            syllables in the word (Section 2.2), 
            or any special features that might make its scanning unusual (Sections 
            4.2, 4.3, 
            and 4.4). Mark down its syllables 
            in sequence as long, short, or flexible--you can use any sort of notation 
            you like, as long as it can reflect these three possibilities. If 
            the word is a monosyllable, consider whether it may be flexible (Section 
            2.1). 
          Then deal with the second word. 
            You can write down the syllables either from left to right, as we 
            have done for typographical convenience in this book, or from right 
            to left, as flows more naturally from working with Urdu script; a 
            consistent method of your own is the main necessity. If some syllable 
            puzzles you, leave its space blank, or mark it in lightly (pencil 
            is more convenient than pen for this kind of work). Scan three or 
            four lines in this way, trying to keep the syllables properly aligned 
            in vertical columns as you go. 
          After three or four lines you will 
            almost always notice a pattern emerging, though you'll very often 
            find one or two lines skewed or disarranged somehow, coming out too 
            long or too short. Remember to allow for the extra, unscanned short 
            syllable which may occur at the end of the line in almost all meters, 
            and which does not count in determining the line length. All lines 
            of poetry officially end with a long syllable, since all the meters 
            do. If some lines still seem irregular in length, scan a few more 
            lines, until the weight of evidence is sufficient to tell you the 
            normal line length. Then go over the idiosyncratic lines carefully 
            for one or more of the following tricky features: 
          *the word aur 
            [aur], which is scanned either (= -), or merely (=). It is 
            so common that it is in a class by itself as a source of error. 
          *possible cases of word-grafting 
            (Section 3.1). Word-grafting often 
            reduces the number of syllables by one, so an extra syllable in a 
            line can often be removed by detecting the presence of word-grafting. 

          *metrical peculiarities. 
            You might be dealing with one of those pairs of meters which permit 
            the substitution of two shorts for one long, usually in the next-to-last 
            syllable. Uniquely, the pair consisting of meters #1 and #9 permits 
            such substitution in the third syllable. (These pairs of freely combinable 
            meters are enumerated at the end of Section 
            6.1.) Some of these meters also permit the first syllable, normally 
            long, to be replaced at will with a short (meters #14-#19). Also, 
            be alert for the extra, unscanned short syllable permitted before 
            the caesura in meters which have a caesura; see Section 
            6.1 for details.
          These features, which can be detected 
            only AFTER the initial scanning process, account for almost all irregularities 
            in the number of syllables per line. If any irregularity remains, 
            set aside the line in which it occurs for later study. When in doubt, 
            scan more lines and consider them all together; the pattern will emerge 
            more and more clearly. 
          Very rarely, but once in a while, 
            you'll encounter a situation in which a pattern simply fails to emerge, 
            in which each line seems to be quite different in length and pattern 
            from other lines. If this happens, the most probable diagnosis is 
            Mir's "Hindi" meter (Section 6.2); 
            check the patterns and the length to see if this is the case. Remember 
            that a half-length form of this meter, though quite uncommon, does 
            sometimes occur. Then there is meter #6 (Section 
            6.1), which like "Hindi" meter permits frequent substitution of 
            two shorts for one long, and thus can vary greatly from line to line. 
            Another possibility is that you are dealing with a rubaa((ii 
            [rubaa((ii]. Usually you will know beforehand if this is the case, 
            since the [rubaa((ii] meters are such a distinctive group (Section 
            6.3), and since [rubaa((ii] poetry normally comes in four-line 
            units which rhyme AABA or AAAA. 
          If you're dealing with "Hindi" meter 
            or one of its cousins, you will know it. Otherwise, you'll be able 
            to normalize the length of enough lines to make the pattern clear. 
            You will then have orderly vertical columns of syllables. If the nth 
            vertical column contains all long or (most improbably) all short syllables, 
            you will have no doubt about the length of the nth syllable of the 
            line. If the column contains a mixture of longs and flexibles, or 
            a mixture of shorts and flexibles, the true length of the syllable 
            will still be clear. Write the proper mark below each column, separated 
            from it by a line or a bit of space. 
          What if the column contains all 
            flexibles? If you want to be perfectly sure of your ground, scan more 
            lines. But a column of five or six flexibles usually indicates a short 
            syllable. The reason for this is that the normal processes of syllable 
            division produce more long syllables than short ones. All flexible 
            syllables are two-letter ones: they are thus properly "long" syllables, 
            which may also be pressed into service as short ones. In particular, 
            all the common monosyllabic words which the poet can most conveniently 
            shuffle around to fit the meter are either long or long-turned-flexible 
            (Section 2.1). Thus when the 
            poet wants a long syllable, he has a large stock to choose from and 
            the odds are against his using a whole column of flexible longs and 
            no inflexible longs. But when he wants a convenient short syllable, 
            he has much less scope for choice, so the odds are much greater that 
            he would come to select a whole column of flexibles. The longer the 
            column of flexibles, the greater the probability that the syllable 
            in question is short. 
          Except in the case of the peculiar 
            meters described above, it is impossible for a single column to contain 
            both long and short syllables. It may often happen that all the syllables 
            in your column appear to be of the same kind, or else flexible, with 
            only a single glaring aberration. If there is any doubt, scan more 
            lines until the weight of evidence makes the proper scansion clear. 
            Then focus on the aberration. Consider the following possibilities: 

          *possible word-grafting 
            (Section 3.1). If word-grafting 
            is permissible in the situation and would correct the scansion, it 
            should be assumed to have taken place. 
          *the possible presence of 
            a [tashdiid], even if it is not written; or the erroneous 
            insertion of a tashdiid by the calligrapher 
            where there should not be one. 
          *the possible presence of 
            an [i.zaafat], even if it is not written; or the erroneous 
            insertion of an i.zaafat where there should 
            not be one. 
          *the possibility of an Arabic, 
            Persian, or Indic word that falls under some special irregular 
            scansion rule; see Chapter 4 and the 
            Glossary. 
          *the possibility of a misspelled 
            word-- it's possible that a word with a flexible spelling 
            to indicate scansion (Section 2.4) 
            has in fact been misspelled by the calligrapher. The most common possibility of this kind is an ek [ek] where there should be an ik [ik], or vice versa.
          *the possibility of confusion 
            between n and ;N 
            . There could be confusion between [nuun] and [nuun-e ;Gunnah], with 
            one being erroneously present while the other is metrically correct. 

          *the amphibious role of 
            o ii e as vowels or consonants, depending 
            on syllable division. 
          If none of these possibilities can 
            account for the discrepancy, remember that editors and calligraphers 
            do often make mistakes. Compare your edition of the text with some 
            other if possible, to check its accuracy. It is all too easy for the 
            calligrapher to write kar [kar] for ke 
            [ke], shaah [shaah] for shah 
            [shah], or the reverse. Such mistakes, all but undetectable in prose, 
            can have a great effect on scanning, and it is necessary to be alert 
            for them. It is much more likely that there's some such mistake in 
            transmission, than that the poet wrote a line flagrantly out of meter. 
            However, pronunciation and poetic practice have varied somewhat with 
            time and place; the oldest poets may have archaic usages, and the 
            newest may be experimentally taking liberties.
          If the poet has done something idiosyncratic, 
            or if there is a textual problem, you will be well able to isolate 
            and investigate it. If you have enough lines to work with, no small 
            anomaly can possibly confuse you: you can always break the code. But 
            sometimes you may want to scan a very short poem, or a single two-line 
            shi((r [shi((r]. No method, and certainly not 
            ours, can guarantee you perfect success. There are enough kinds of 
            flexibility and uncertainty built into Urdu meter so that mechanical 
            accuracy requires a good deal of redundancy. However, if you are willing 
            to venture, it is usually possible to make excellent educated guesses. 
            Scan the lines in the normal way as best you can. Usually you arrive 
            at a result which leaves at least one flexible syllable even in the 
            final resolution. A column consisting of only two flexibles has no 
            more than about a 60-40 chance of representing a short syllable. Sometimes 
            you can make use of the rule that three short syllables never occur 
            in a row. But usually you need more help than this. If the meter is 
            a common one, you may be able to recognize it; then you will know 
            for sure what the flexible syllables really are. 
          Even if you don't recognize the 
            meter, you may be able to figure it out by recognizing the feet. The 
            great majority of Urdu meters contain four feet. And the great majority 
            of four-foot meters contain two or more identical feet among the four. 
            Remember that the middle feet are more likely to be longer, often 
            four-syllable ones; the last foot is often very short (two or three 
            syllables), and the first foot is also often short (three syllables). 
            A good working knowledge of the afaa((iil [afaa((iil] 
            (Chapter 5) is obviously very helpful in 
            this process. Remember that none of the [afaa((iil] end with two short 
            syllables, and only one-third of the [afaa((iil] end with one short 
            syllable. Two short syllables together usually occur at the beginning 
            of a foot. Try to envision the breakdown of your scansion into feet. 
            If you can discover two or more identical feet, you can often resolve 
            any remaining flexible syllables by seeing the correspondences. If 
            your scansion reveals a caesura pattern (foot A, foot B, foot A, foot 
            B), you can easily determine the true length of any flexible syllables. 
            If your meter appears shorter than average, it is probably a three-foot 
            one. Three-foot meters are very likely not to have any identical feet. 

          If none of these shortcuts works, 
            you can always take the meter list (Section 
            6.1), and plow through it until you recognize your meter; though 
            the list is not exhaustive, it contains meters for something like 
            95% of the meters you will normally encounter. For rare and exotic 
            meters, you can check in Barker or 
            Grahame Bailey. Don't let a difficult-looking 
            meter intimidate you. Even educated native speakers have trouble when 
            given small samples of exotic meters. If you are careful and persistent, 
            you can eventually figure out almost anything. 
          A NOTE ON na:zm 
            [na:zm]: Modern na:zm 
            are actually much closer to traditional metrical conventions than 
            might be expected. The paaband na:zm [paaband 
            na:zm], "regular verse," always uses one of the traditional meters, 
            and traditional rhyming elements as well. The na:zm-e 
            mu((arraa [na:zm-e mu((arraa], "blank verse," also uses a traditional 
            meter, though it is unrhymed. 
          Undoubtedly aazaad 
            na:zm [aazaad na:zm], "free verse," takes liberties with traditional 
            meters. Yet the particular meter any aazaad na:zm 
            is taking liberties with can almost always be recognized. Suppose 
            that the traditional meter consists of the sequence: foot A, foot 
            B, foot C, foot D. Then the aazaad na:zm might 
            have lines in foot-sequences like the following: ABC / ABCD / A / 
            AB / CDA / B / CDAB / CD, and so on. Sometimes a foot itself may begin 
            at the end of one line and end at the beginning of the next. Lines 
            may also be stretched by the duplication of medial feet: ABBBCD, ABBCCD, 
            etc. But the omission of a foot (ACD, BD) does not usually occur. 
            Common Hindi meters are sometimes adapted and used in [aazaad na:zm], 
            but in general the traditional meters, though modified, remain quite 
            recognizable. 
          There is also of course na;srii 
            na:zm [na;srii na:zm], the "prose poem." These 
            generally use metrical feet very idiosyncratically, if at all. Usually they can't be scanned in any systematic 
            way.

       -- meter 
        book index -- Ghalib sitemap -- Mir 
        sitemap -- FWP's main 
        page -- 

